As someone who designs for the web, I’m always looking to improve my understanding of what people respond to. In the early days of Whiz Tutor, one of the hardest lessons I had to learn was that people don’t always use an interface the way you expect them to. You expect a user to click a button and surprise, surprise, they will click everything BUT that button.
In order for us to gain a better understanding of how users interact with our site, we integrated Smartlook — one of the many tools out there that lets you record visitor interaction. This tool records a user’s session on your website and you can actually see where they move their mouse around, where they click, and what they type. (Both cool and creepy, I know.) Much to our surprise, our web app wasn’t as easy to use as we thought. To be more specific, people were having difficulties booking a tutor for a specific time slot. Considering that we are a tutoring platform, this is a pretty egregious problem.
So why is this happening? Are people just that dumb? Or did we just fail to design a good interface?
(Hint: It’s the latter)
David Blaine Creates Great User Experiences
Before I air Whiz Tutor’s UX dirty laundry, I want to talk about magic for a second. If you’ve seen the most recent David Blaine special, you’d know that he has a magic trick called “The Human Aquarium.” This performance involves producing live frogs from right out of his mouth. Pretty insane stuff. The guy is somehow spitting out frog after frog and you’re left in awe. His body is literally a human aquarium. For a brief moment, you can suspend all of your beliefs about magic not being real and appreciate the performance because it just works. It’s a great experience to be in the presence of his magic. Forget all of the intricate logistics of David Blaine having to store frogs in his esophagus. Forget that he has to regurgitate the frogs without euthanizing them. For just a very brief moment, it’s magical.
The reason I’m making this comparison is because I’ve started to realize that the best apps out there have an element of magic: they just work.
A Few Magical Apps
Dropbox
Have you ever thought about how magical Dropbox is? They have made it extremely easy to sync files across all of your devices. You can be on your computer and all you have to do is drag a file into your Dropbox folder and POOF — like magic, that file is now synced to all of your devices. Gone are the days of putting files on a flash drives.
Uber
Getting a ride somewhere has become so easy nowadays, you don’t even have to think about it. All you do is type in your destination in the Uber app, tap on a button, and a car shows up at your location. It’s so easy. It just works.
Spotify
Do you remember purchasing CD’s and having to import them onto your computer. Listening to music in one centralized location used to be a total pain in the butt. And that was just if you wanted them on your computer. What if you wanted these songs on your mp3 player? You couldn’t even put songs on your phone. Enter Spotify. Their app lets you search artists, albums, genres, etc and you have streamable music at your fingertips. Almost any song you want on any device that has Spotify on it. You can even listen to music offline. Crazy, right?
Sometimes I stop to appreciate just how amazing technology has become. These four apps that I described just work — and almost like magic. They function exactly how we expect them to and fit right into our mental model of them. So much that most of us don’t even think about it.
A Digression to Discuss Mental Models
If you’ve read anything about UX, you’ve probably heard the term, “mental model” thousands of times. And if you’re unfamiliar with that term — don’t fret. A person’s mental model is simply their expectation of how something (like an app) should work. It is a person’s interpretation of reality and it is how they explain something to themselves. We all have mental models because we all expect things to work a certain way.
I’m going to be pedantic for a second and talk about mental models in relation to a very ubiquitous app that is most likely on your phone — the camera app. Regardless of what kind of phone you have, the camera app on your phone probably works like this: you tap on a circular button on the screen and it takes a picture. It just works. It’s so painfully obvious that it hurts reading about it. The thing about camera apps are that they are designed to match our mental models of how we think they should work. If you’re a die hard Apple user who has never touched an Android phone, you would have no problem snapping a photo on an Android Phone — and vice versa.
Booking a Tutor is Not Magical
Getting back to one of Whiz Tutor’s pain points — booking a tutor for a specific time slot is difficult. In fact it is so difficult, that most of our customers prefer to call our customer service line so that we can book a tutoring session for them.
Let’s take a look at some screen shots so we can diagnose this problem.

Put yourself in the shoes of a student who is looking to book Justin. You land on his profile and you are given all of the tools you need to book him for Sunday at 12PM — you just don’t know it.
As we observed users on Smartlook, we noticed that they were having problems booking sessions. Our assumption was this: we will include a HUGE button that reads, “Book Justin” and users will have no problem figuring out how to schedule a tutoring session.

When a user clicks on this button, Justin’s schedule will expand like so:

From here, a user can click on a time slot and proceed to book Justin. The problem was that most users didn’t know that they could click on “Book Justin.” We saw that users would click on everything BUT the actual button. They clicked on things that weren’t even clickable! This was a frustrating experience for us as a team to watch. I’m sure it was even more frustrating for the users who couldn’t figure out how to book tutors. The worst part is that the users that did end up clicking on the “Book Justin” button didn’t know that the time slots were clickable. Who can blame them?
Making Users Less Annoyed At Us
To alleviate these pain points, we looked to simplify the process of booking a tutor and Smartlook has showed that users are now having a much easier time doing so.
And voila, the solution:

Instead of having a call-to-action button that says “Book Justin,” a user lands on a Justin’s page with his schedule already expanded. What is more, we have included small badges next to time slots that say, “Book Now.” We have seen that users are starting to understand that time slots are clickable and clicking on them brings you to the next step in scheduling a tutor.
Ultimately, our goals are to make the booking process work just as users expect. We want to understand our user’s mental models and design an experience that doesn’t make them think too hard about simple tasks. In this particular scenario, it meant that hiding valuable information underneath button presses was less magical than revealing it from the start. Who would have thought?
